I do not believe life is as simple as humanity's current understanding and general acceptance of it entails. I am referring to life as we have observed on Earth - this is not a document speculating about extra terrestrial life. We view life from an anthrocentric viewpoint - humanity as the center of what life is, as the ultimate version of life, as the top of the food chain. This is far from the truth on many levels.

Firstly, life has existed for a very long time on Earth. Humanity has only existed for a fraction of a fraction of the time-frame in which life has existed. Everything between the genesis of life and Humanity forms a gradient of the different qualities of life which comprise humans. Some life-forms are stationary while others can freely move for example. Humans are initially rooted as a fetus, then become free-moving after birth. Some possess no capacity for thought and react solely to stimulus while others can form a rudimentary level of abstract thought (dogs, birds, other primates etc). Some have a language of colors, some of chemicals, some of sounds, many a combination of various means of communication. For Humanity to possess the qualities that it does, other creatures prior to us found them to be an evolutionary advantage which propagated up the tree of life until we came along.

There are several epochs of this development; single celled life, multi-cellular life, non-aquatic plant life, animal life, introspective life, and abstract life. We are on the cusp of a transition from introspective to abstract as the dominant life-form on the planet. As epochs transition, life from the earlier epoch carries forward into the later one - a symbiosis of creatures from the earlier being the catalyst to move to the next. Earlier life forms eventually develop traits that encourage differing species with complimentary behaviors to cluster, which eventually leads to reliance on each-other for survival - this coupling becomes tighter with successive generations until hybridization occurs. Creatures need to be able to communicate to couple, the medium of communication has transitioned through epochs as well. Chemical signals, visual signals, audible signals, olfactory signals as well as others have come along and again there is a gradient between early forms of life and Humanity and how they combine these signals into language - either consciously or instinctively. The range of similar sensory organs are present across various forms of life at different levels of complexity, with the functionality of those organs varying greatly indicates just a small portion of the variations possible on the processing the signals. No one species processes signals exactly the same way, nor in many cases do individual members of the same species. Yet there is common behavior between very diverse forms of life, even across epochs.

As life progressed and the signals became a more ubiquitous feature of the environment, a fascinating trait developed - although I cannot say in which creature it first appeared. It allowed the creature to not only respond to this signal with a behavior, but to choose between multiple responses to a signal, influenced by the environment in which it occurred. It is at this point that intelligence came into existence - the ability to separate signals of communication from the environment and reply with a variable behavior which considers both stimuli. Intelligence evolved as a biological advantage alongside physical characteristics, eventually allowing for a greater delay between signal and response within which a larger array of behaviors could be assessed as potential responses. Another way it advanced was to take in larger amounts of data from the surrounding environment to use in the decision making process. Yet another way was developing memory in a creature so that it could essentially short-cut the decision making process for a familiar combination of stimulus and react more quickly than another creature which had not yet encountered the same combination. It has recently been published that a living creature does not necessarily need a brain to retain information as a 'memory' for lack of an appropriate distinctive term at this time.

Some creatures were able to mimic the behavior of other members of their species without having encountered the stimulus to invoke the behavior. Eventually a creature with both mimicry and memory could show a behavior to another and associate that behavior with a signal, then use that signal as a shortcut to manifest that behavior in the other creature. This ability is the foundation of language.

Language can be any combination of signals, from visual mating displays in birds, chemical signals between fungi, or humans speaking, writing, creating art or using a form of sign language. Yet again there is a gradient of complexity of communication between members of a species, however there is also the complexity of communication between members of varying species to consider as well. Humans seem to excel in the latter area - I would argue that our ability to reliably predict and alter the behavior of other species - both flora and fauna - to our benefit, then pass on the practice via language is the primary technological reason for the success of our species.

A technology is a creature's attempt to emulate an observed and remembered phenomenon by altering the environment, when it does not have the physical characteristics to otherwise emulate it. Therefore any behavior a creature uses to change the environment can be considered a technology - this is a departure from the colloquial view of the word which has a very human-centric use case. As humans we are the most prolific technology creating, utilizing and combining creature that is known. A tunnel dug by a prairie dog is as valid an example of technology as a tunnel dug by a human, they circumvent obstacles, provide shelter and also provide a survival advantage - in the Vietnam war the Viet Cong utilized tunnels in familiar territory to huge strategic advantage. The fact that humans use tools devised in their large brains, while prairie dogs use their hard forearm claws simply shows that each creature is capable of utilizing its vastly different biology to accomplish a fundamentally similar modification of the environment.

A tool is a technological artifact which alters the environment by using a piece of the environment to transform another piece of itself. To use a tool is a different skill than actualizing a technology, as it requires the creature to disassociate its actions from their biology and project the action to an external object. I believe it is important to have a distinction between the two to acknowledge the fact that there needs to be the realization of a technological concept prior to the implementation of a tool to support it. There are gradients of ability by species and by individual here too; for derivations of both technologies and tools from observations, ability to find synergy amongst them, how well the concept can be communicated to other members of the species and the ease of which physical tools can be implemented due to the physicality of the creature. Humans excel in these areas and a relatively small subset of other species have these abilities - these creatures, along with those that they benefit the most from will form the transitory group between animal and abstract life. Looking at it one way, Humanity leads the charge. However there are several perspectives on abstract life to discuss.

Abstract life will come to define life which is not bound to a single physical body. Following the preceding pattern to conclusion, if a behavior can be abstracted as a signal, then the entire collection of information which defines an individual's experience, memories and behavior set can also be abstracted to a signal. In the present paradigm, we view this information as intrinsically bound to a biological entity - but this may be a limitation akin to the groundhog using only its claws - if the full experience could be disassociated and projected to an external body, then the body becomes a tool as much as the groundhog claws projected to a shovel. The entire process of civilization building, from the first human settlements through to the moment you are reading this, has been Humanity achieving symbiosis with itself through the unique behavior (of which we know) of introspection. In addition to this Humanity has been developing a wide array of technologies and tools for controlling the environment in which we live and through collective experience, language and education are gaining an understanding of potential reactions to conditions in the environment. This process will bring the species to the point of epoch transforming technological realization - that we can capture our entire collective experience with sufficient sensor resolution and be 'virtually anywhere' - and allows for tool development to support this disassociation of experience from a physical body. With sufficient advancement a living entity may not need a physical body as we presently understand them. We have also found that data can be aggregated in meaningful ways to the point that an individual human can comprehend far more than what's happening in the location and time that they immediately occupy. Combining these technologies synergistically along with supporting tools will allow for humans to experience increasingly vast expanses of space and time while defying the biologically-bound experience of mortality.

We also pursue symbiosis with other creatures through genetic modification, in that case the life is not abstract but composite. Based on what I know at this point, I do not believe this is an epoch-transforming technology in itself - this is not to belittle the impact genetic technology will have on life as we know it. Creatures in all epochs preceding this one have the potential to be impacted by it, as do those in epochs to follow. Epoch-transforming technologies add an additional, new dimension which life can grow into. The genetic modifications allow for more precision within the current dimension of life, but not a new one.

Consider a point, line, polygon and polyhedra. A point is a single point of reference, one genetic code that is able to self-reproduce through a behavior which brings in energy - this is akin to a single cell organism's experience. To form a line, two points need to be connected. Once two single cells couple into a multi-cellular organism, it is because the life-forms co-developed their signals into communication into a coupling - this can be thought of as the line between two species. All signals sent between single cell organisms that did not result in sufficient communication to create a multi-cellular organism fall somewhere between their respective points. An infinite amount of points make a line, so the fact that single cell organisms still exist and fail (or don't even try) to couple does not mean the next epoch cannot exist at the same time. In fact many single cell organisms thrive on and everywhere around later-epoch creatures. The ones that do couple begin the first dimension of life.

The next epoch transformation was caused when the right combination of multi-cellular organisms evolved to bring about the process of sexual reproduction - cells from two parent creatures of the same species which could communicate so efficiently that they could become a whole new child multi-cellular organism. I believe this is the first instance that a life-form would use what I would consider a tool to aid it's survival. Some fish may use bubbles to help protect their eggs - using air to modify the water around the clutch, the surface tension protecting the eggs. Genetic traits from either parent carry forward to the child. If a polygon is an infinite amount of lines covering an area, then the practically infinite potential combinations of genes during reproduction between a set of sexual partners is the second dimension.

If the environment in which these multi-cellular sets of sexual partners evolves successfully and propagates throughout the plane that they occupy (in this case early-earth bodies of water) then the polygon representing the dimension of life 'covers' the whole thing - effectively rendering it as another isolated dot. The collective experience therein is isolated from any other point of reference.  It wasn't until multi-cellular plants eventually started reproducing with primitive seeds, some of which ended up on the shore, that the technology of surviving on land became plausible. Without conscious guidance the technological development process took millions of years, but eventually it happened. Some of those species were better able to survive than others when exposed to the surface, some of those could even survive on land away from the water. They got better and better and eventually were only able to live on land. Every species which broke out of the second dimensions of life which existed in isolated pockets of water on the early Earth surface to exist on land represents another new point to which that pocket of water was connected - as they eventually began to thrive, species would eventually end up co-existing. Just like the previous dimensions before them some of these species would eventually hybridize - usually those which somehow benefitted from each other's proximity. That hybridization of life-forms from separate aquatic environments to better survive in the atmosphere forms the third dimension. All the potential polygons formed by all species from both environments forms a polyhedra - multicellular life was no longer bound to the ocean. It now grows vertically towards the sun and develops technologies to aid in this goal. Other non-plant multi-cellular life also join the plants on the surface but the plants enable the next epoch transformation for non-plants.

One of the technologies that enables many of the plant species to survive outside of the ocean is the ability to process the carbon dioxide in the air using energy from the sun and water, utilize the carbon and hydrogen to produce rigid cells, and then expel the oxygen as waste by photosynthesis. This allowed the plants to thrive as it increased their survivability and domain. Over millions of years enough plants used this process that the composition of the atmosphere began to change, becoming more oxygen-rich over a long period of time. Fires and geological events would lower the levels occasionally, but the changes were enough that the primary element of the very environment in which life was evolving was completely different than it was at a previous point in time.

The fourth dimension of life is the one-dimensional movement of the third-dimension polyhedra along the axis of time - in this case a subset of life which evolved in reaction a time-bound variable in the amount of Oxygen in the atmosphere, which is influenced by a different subset, the state of life at any given point in time forming the series of moments making up the timeline and the environment in which it exists. In other words plants inadvertently altered the plane of Earth's atmosphere, upon which most life depended, through technology. The plane on which animal life evolved now included the function of the amount of plant life and oxygen on Earth at a given point in time.

The transition to the present epoch was brought about when the conditions became right for humans to evolve. As introspective creatures with bicameral minds, humans possess the ability to imagine which is a powerful trait. This eventually allowed humans to hypothesize and experiment, the development and formalization of a scientific method quite recently provided us with the ability to create reliably calibrated sensor tools, computers and data visualization techniques to begin to analyze patterns at a scale orders of magnitude larger and smaller than our physical environment. We have developed medicines, networks, vehicles, food preservation and countless other tools and technologies to extend our lifespan while providing extra free time. Over generations the new tools and technologies imagined and created inspired the next, while our support systems improved in kind. We flourished much like the plants after their initial era of technological innovation in epochs before. Now, we are realistically the only threat to our own dominance of the planet and beyond, short of a massive catastrophe on Earth due to our technological capacity to render the entire planet unlivable for ourselves. Just as an oxygen-rich atmosphere allows for great fires to burn and thin out plant life, a technology-rich environment can allow for side effects that pose a threat to our own lives, as well as the other species around us.

Oxygen is indeed a waste product from the photosynthesis process - the plants don't need it, so they throw it away. In that sense, they polluted the atmosphere. In other ways they 'polluted' the land on which they were rooted, shedding parts of their physical bodies such as leaves which would decay, as would the entire physical body after the plant died. This waste product forms soil, petroleum and so on - incredibly useful side effects for humans, animals and even other plants in many respects -  Pollution from human technological processes - the waste from everything we do from food scraps, plastic bags from shopping, gasses such as carbon dioxide from inefficient combustion engines and runoff from fertilizers on crops - affects the environment in which it occurs on scale from local to atmospheric.
